DropDownBox: add Search in Embedded Components topic (#8854)
DevExpress/devextreme-documentation: concepts/05 UI Components/DropDownBox/20 Search in Embedded Components/10 Search by Lookup Column (TreeList).md

> This topic covers search by a lookup column display value in a [DropDownBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/') with an embedded [TreeList](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTreeList '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTreeList/'). Because the search target is a display value from a related dataset, the approach resolves the typed text to matching IDs via the lookup data source, then applies a [`DataSource.filter`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/filter(filterExpr).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#filterfilterExpr') on the main data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial adds a search/filter capability to a [DropDownBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/') with an embedded [TreeList](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTreeList '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTreeList/'). This example searches a lookup field. Since the search target is a display value from a related dataset, the code  resolves the typed text to matching IDs via the lookup data source, then applies a [`DataSource.filter`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/filter(filterExpr).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#filterfilterExpr') to the main data source.
```

Author: Same comment

> [note] This example demonstrates search when the TreeList uses a lookup column and you want the DropDownBox search to work by the lookup display value (for example, employee name), not by the stored key. If you do not need a lookup column, see [Search by Regular Field (DataGrid)](/concepts/05%20UI%20Components/DropDownBox/20%20Search%20in%20Embedded%20Components/05%20Search%20by%20Regular%20Field%20(DataGrid).md '/Documentation/Guide/UI_Components/DropDownBox/Search_in_Embedded_Components/Search_by_Regular_Field_(DataGrid)/').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[note] For a similar example that does not involve a lookup column, see [Search by Regular Field (DataGrid)](/concepts/05%20UI%20Components/DropDownBox/20%20Search%20in%20Embedded%20Components/05%20Search%20by%20Regular%20Field%20(DataGrid).md '/Documentation/Guide/UI_Components/DropDownBox/Search_in_Embedded_Components/Search_by_Regular_Field_(DataGrid)/').
```

The full working code is available in the GitHub repository:

#include btn-open-github with {
    href: "https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-dropdownbox-implement-search-for-treelist"
}

### 1) Configure DropDownBox to Accept User Input

> To allow typing and handle user input:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> - Enable [`acceptCustomValue`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/acceptCustomValue.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#acceptCustomValue').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Activate [`acceptCustomValue`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/acceptCustomValue.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#acceptCustomValue').
```

> - Set [`valueChangeEvent`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/valueChangeEvent.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#valueChangeEvent') to an empty string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set [`valueChangeEvent`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/valueChangeEvent.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#valueChangeEvent') to an empty string to prevent the component from trying to interpret typing as a value change.
```

---
##### jQuery

    <!-- tab: index.js -->
    $('#treeBox').dxDropDownBox({
        acceptCustomValue: true,
        valueChangeEvent: '',
        openOnFieldClick: false,
        // ...
    });

##### Angular

    <!-- tab: drop-down-list.component.html -->
    <dx-drop-down-box
        [acceptCustomValue]="true"
        valueChangeEvent=""
        [openOnFieldClick]="false"
        ...
    >
    </dx-drop-down-box>

##### Vue

    <!-- tab: DropDownList.vue -->
    <DxDropDownBox
        :accept-custom-value="true"
        value-change-event=""
        :open-on-field-click="false"
        ...
    />

##### React

    <!-- tab: DropDownList.tsx -->
    <DropDownBox
        acceptCustomValue={true}
        valueChangeEvent=""
        openOnFieldClick={false}
        ...
    />

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    <!--Razor C#-->
    @(Html.DevExtreme().DropDownBox()
        .AcceptCustomValue(true)
        .ValueChangeEvent("")
        .OpenOnFieldClick(false)
        // ...
    )

---

### 2) Create the Main `DataSource` for TreeList

> TreeList search in this scenario uses [`DataSource.filter`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/filter(filterExpr).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#filterfilterExpr') instead of `searchValue`, because the typed text must first be resolved to IDs via the lookup data source.

Reviewer: There's no references to `filter` or `searchValue` in code yet. So this step simply adds a data source, no need to mention anything else - it just adds confusion. I was looking for a "filter" in code. 

 
```suggestion
Declare a data source for the TreeList. 
```

    const [lookupItems, setLookupItems] = useState<Employee[]>([]);

    useEffect(() => {
        lookupStore.load().then((items: Employee[]) => {
            setLookupItems(items);
            dropDownBoxRef.current?.instance().repaint();
        });
    }, []);

    const displayExpr = useCallback((item: Task | null): string => {
        if (!item) return '';
        if (!lookupItems.length) return 'Loading...';
        const employee = lookupItems.find(
            (e) => e.ID === item.Task_Assigned_Employee_ID
        );
        if (!employee) return item.Task_Subject || '';
        return `${employee.Name}: ${item.Task_Subject} (${item.Task_Status})`;
    }, [lookupItems]);

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    function displayExpr(item) {
        if (!lookupItems || !lookupItems.length) return 'Loading...';
        if (!item) return '';
        const employeeData = lookupItems.find(
            (employee) => employee.ID === item.Task_Assigned_Employee_ID,
        );
        if (!employeeData) return item.Task_Subject || '';
        return `${employeeData.Name}: ${item.Task_Subject} (${item.Task_Status})`;
    }

---

### 4) Configure the Embedded TreeList in `contentTemplate`

> Use DropDownBox [`contentTemplate`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/contentTemplate.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#contentTemplate') to render the TreeList. Enable [`focusedRowEnabled`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTreeList/1%20Configuration/focusedRowEnabled.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTreeList/Configuration/#focusedRowEnabled') and set single [`selection.mode`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTreeList/1%20Configuration/selection/mode.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTreeList/Configuration/selection/#mode').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the DropDownBox component. Use [`contentTemplate`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/contentTemplate.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#contentTemplate') to render the TreeList. In the TreeList component, activate [`focusedRowEnabled`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTreeList/1%20Configuration/focusedRowEnabled.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTreeList/Configuration/#focusedRowEnabled') and set single [`selection.mode`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTreeList/1%20Configuration/selection/mode.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTreeList/Configuration/selection/#mode').
```

        .Selection(s => s.Mode(SelectionMode.Single))
        .SelectedRowKeys(new JS("[component.option('value')]"))
        .Scrolling(s => s.Mode(TreeListScrollingMode.Virtual))
        .Columns(c => {
            c.Add().DataField("Task_ID");
            c.Add().DataField("Task_Assigned_Employee_ID").Caption("Employee").MinWidth(120)
                .Lookup(l => l.DataSource(ds => ds.Mvc().Controller("SampleData").LoadAction("GetEmployees"))
                    .ValueExpr("ID").DisplayExpr("Name"));
            c.Add().DataField("Task_Subject").Width(300);
            c.Add().DataField("Task_Start_Date").Caption("Start Date").DataType(GridColumnDataType.Date);
            c.Add().DataField("Task_Status").Caption("Status");
            c.Add().DataField("Task_Due_Date").Caption("Due Date").DataType(GridColumnDataType.Date);
        })
        .OnContentReady("treeListOnContentReady")
        .OnFocusedRowChanged("treeListOnFocusedRowChanged")
        .OnKeyDown("treeListOnKeyDown")
        .OnSelectionChanged("treeListOnSelectionChanged")
        .OnInitialized("treeListOnInitialized")
    )

---

### 5) Implement Search in `onInput`

> Use DropDownBox [`onInput`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onInput.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onInput') to open the dropdown and trigger the search. Because the search targets a lookup column display value, the typed text must first be resolved to matching IDs via the lookup data source, then applied as a [`DataSource.filter`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/filter(filterExpr).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#filterfilterExpr') on the main data source:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Handle the [`onInput`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onInput.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onInput') event for the DropDownBox. Open the dropdown and trigger the search. Since the search targets a lookup column display value, resolve the typed text to matching IDs via the lookup data source, then specify [`DataSource.filter`](/api-reference/30%20Data%20Layer/DataSource/3%20Methods/filter(filterExpr).md '/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#filterfilterExpr') for the main data source:
```

Author: I don't feel that splitting the first sentence into two does anything good.

"then specify DataSource.filter for the main data source" is vague. You're not specifying a filter for something. you're applying a filter on the data source.

Reviewer: Splitting is because of this phrase - "DropDownBox onInput". I explain my reasons in another comment. Basically, the easiest change here is "DropDownBox.onInput", if that works. 

As for the last part... A few things: 

- I don't see a difference between "specify a filter" or "apply a filter". 
- Usually the verb "apply" goes with the preposition "to" (not "on"). So you "apply a filter to the data source". 
- Would it work for you if the last part was this? "then apply a [filter] to the main data source"?

        }
    }

##### React

    <!-- tab: DropDownList.tsx -->
    const onInput = useCallback((e: DropDownBoxTypes.InputEvent): void => {
        if (searchTimerIdRef.current) clearTimeout(searchTimerIdRef.current);
        const instance = e.component;
        if (!dropDownBoxOpened) setDropDownBoxOpened(true);
        if (isSearchIncomplete(instance)) {
            const text = instance.option('text');
            if (text) {
                searchTimerIdRef.current = setTimeout(() => {
                    applySearchFilter(text, searchExprValue, dataSource);
                }, searchTimeout);
            } else {
                dataSource.filter(null);
            }
            focusInput();
        }
    }, [searchTimerIdRef, dropDownBoxOpened, searchExprValue, dataSource, searchTimeout]);

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    function dropDownBoxOnInput(e) {
        clearTimeout(searchTimerId);
        const instance = e.component;
        if (!instance.option('opened')) instance.open();
        const dataSource = treeList.getDataSource();
        searchTimerId = performSearch(e, dataSource);
    }

---

### 6) Detect Whether the User Is Searching (`isSearchIncomplete`)

> The `isSearchIncomplete` function returns `true` if the user has changed the input text and a new search must be applied (that is, `text` differs from the current `displayValue`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `isSearchIncomplete` function returns `true` if the user has changed the input text and the component must execute another search operation:
```

Author: Same comment

    function isSearchIncomplete(dropDownBox) {
        let displayValue = dropDownBox.option('displayValue');
        let text = dropDownBox.option('text') || '';
        displayValue = displayValue && displayValue.length && displayValue[0];
        return text !== displayValue;
    }

### 7) Focus Management in `onOpened`

> When the popup opens, move focus into the TreeList. Use DropDownBox [`onOpened`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onOpened.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onOpened').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the popup opens and the DropDownBox raises its [`onOpened`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onOpened.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onOpened') event, move focus into the TreeList. 
```

                ? args.name === 'opened'
                : args.name === 'focusedRowKey' || args.name === 'focusedColumnIndex';
            if (triggerCondition) {
                list.off('optionChanged', handleOptionChanged);
                requestAnimationFrame(() => {
                    list.focus();
                    if (listFirstLoadCompleted) list.option('opened', false);
                });
            }
        };
        treeList.on('optionChanged', handleOptionChanged);
        if (listFirstLoadCompleted) {
            treeList.option('opened', true);
        }
        const { text, value } = dropDownBox.option();
        const isTextEqualToDisplayValue = text === dropDownBox.option('displayValue')[0];
        const shouldClearSelection = (value && !text) || !isTextEqualToDisplayValue;
        if (shouldClearSelection && treeList.option('selectedRowKeys').length) {
            treeList.option('resetSelection', true);
            treeList.selectRows([]);
            treeList.pageIndex(0).then(() => {
                treeList.option('focusedRowIndex', 0);
                treeList.option('focusedRowKey', firstRowKey);
            });
        }
    }

---

> ### 8) Reset State in `onClosed`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8) Reset Component State in `onClosed`
```

> When the popup closes, DropDownBox [`onClosed`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onClosed.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onClosed') restores consistent state if the user typed something but did not confirm a selection. The search state is cleared by calling `dataSource.filter(null)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the popup closes, the DropDownBox raises its [`onClosed`](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxDropDownBox/1%20Configuration/onClosed.md '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxDropDownBox/Configuration/#onClosed') event. Process situations when the user typed something but did not confirm a selection.
```

Author: Same comment

            const firstKey = treeListInstance.getKeyByRowIndex(0) as number;
            dispatch({ type: 'SELECT_VALUE', value: firstKey });
        }
    }, [selection.selectedRowKeys.length, dataSource]);

##### ASP.NET Core Controls

    function dropDownBoxOnClosed(e) {
        const dataSource = treeList.getDataSource();
        resetSearchState(e, dataSource);
    }

    function resetSearchState(e, dataSource) {
        if (!treeList) return;
        const dropDownBox = e.component;
        const { text } = dropDownBox.option();
        const displayValue = dropDownBox.option('displayValue')[0];
        const resetValue = text && text !== displayValue;
        if (!hasLoadedItems) {
            dropDownBox.reset(null);
            dataSource.filter(null);
            dataSource.load();
        }
        if (resetValue && !treeList.option('selectedRowKeys').length) {
            treeList.option('autoSelection', true);
            const firstKey = treeList.getKeyByRowIndex(0);
            treeList.selectRows([firstKey]);
            treeList.option('focusedRowKey', firstKey);
        }
    }

---

> [note] This approach supports single selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[note] This implementation supports single selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.
```
